This is an interview with O.D.
Butler, Brigadier General, United States Army,
retired.
This is the first interview in the series, Aggies
to Generals. Today's date is July 23, 1980. This is
Terry Anderson. This is a test.
Testing, testing.
This is an interview with Brigadier General
Ogborn Duke Butler. Today is July 23, 1980. This is
Terry Anderson. Now, you were born on September
29, 1918, in Orange, Texas. Let's first talk about
your upbringing. Can you tell us about your
parents, your father's occupation? Sure. My
father and mother both originated in Smith County
near Crook, Texas.
He after finishing high school became engaged in
accounting
for some lumber firms. After he and my mother
married they went to Louisiana to work with people
in the turpentine industry and later on then moved
to Orange County where he was engaged in the lumber
business with three different sawmills and a box
factory. This business failed in 1929. He used his
skills in accounting and knowledge of real estate
to obtain a position with the Tax Assessor
Collector of Orange County, where he was Chief
Deputy. Later, upon retirement of Mr. Charles
Cottle, the Tax Assessor Collector, he ran for the
office and then for more than 20 years he was
re-elected, usually had no opponent. He was the
tax assessor collector for Orange County. Your
father was a tax assessor collector? Yes, he was.
He held that office when he died of a heart attack at
age 61 in 1948 on a deer hunt up in Hill Country,
Texas.
Could you tell us about your mother? My mother was a
jarvish.
Jarvis family was an extremely prolific one over
in East Texas. I believe that
her father had 17 brothers and sisters. Some of
them had brothers. So I'm a distant relative who
seems like half the people over in East Texas. On
the Jarvis side of the family, Her
father was also engaged in business and worked
with the packing industry. Later, he migrated to
Fort Worth and worked in office management for the
packing industry. Retired in Fort Worth. My
mother is still living. She's 92. years old and
still active. She lives with her sister in Dallas,
Texas, not very far from my sister up in northeast
Dallas. How many siblings did you have? Well I had
two brothers and a sister.
My sister was five years older My brother, older
brother two years older who came to Texas A&M the
same year I did and we graduated together from
Texas A&M and then a younger brother who was class
of 1945. That class of course got called into the
service prior to their graduation. He did
get his commission and was serving as a second
lieutenant platoon leader and was killed in
action in France in December of 1944. During the
Battle of the Bulge? Well it was, yes, his
division, the 45th division I believe it was,
arrived during the Battle of the Bulge and they
were committed piecemeal in southern France.
So it was during that December period with the
stress of the Battle of the Bulge that the infantry
got committed even before their artillery got
there. It was probably a rash young second
lieutenant leading his battalion, got killed by a
sniper, we were told. First week he was in combat.
Concerning your parents, could you sort of
describe them? What type of people were they?
Well, I'd say that they were hard-working, very
frugal, conservative,
Anglo-Saxon Protestant. people, kind of old
south type from over in East Texas.
My father's father
died fairly young also and he was a butcher in
Troop, Texas.
My father's mother grandmother on my father's
side continued to reside in troop with one of her
daughters. So as a kid we used to visit them fairly
often. That is once or twice a year. When did your
relatives first come to Texas? Gee I don't know
that. Most Texans know that immediately. I have a
couple of friends in the history department now on
this company that have their original land grant
from Mexico. Quite proud of it. What do you mean by
the fact that your parents were conservative?
Well,
maybe I should say that they were thrifty on the one
side, and that was, I guess, as much by necessity as
otherwise. We never had very much money. but they
of course were homeowners and they were
for I might say God, country, the basic things that
made America great.
Do you think that your father's political career
had much effect on you?
Well, I guess it might have made me a little bit
cynical early about politics. Sometime when he
ran for office, I got exposed early to
the business of politics related to innuendos and
untruths and campaigning and all that bit. Of
course, it has given me a kind of a cynical attitude
about politics, all right.
Okay, what religion, What religion, obviously,
then was important in your upbringing? What
religion was it? Well, it's very strange that my
mother was a Baptist and attended the First
Baptist Church. My father was a leader in the First
Methodist Church in Orange. These churches were
only a couple of blocks apart. We attended church
regularly, but During the time, of course, my
mother was busy with the children. My father took
the older children to church, so it happened that
she was the only Baptist, turned out to be the only
Baptist in the family, and all of the children were
raised in the Methodist church. That is unusual.
Now, were there episodes in your early life that
you think might have some influence on your future
success?
Well of course my father was a very hard-working
man, loved the land. We lived in a suburban area in
Orange County where we had livestock, had horses
and cattle all my life. We also
were fairly large in the vegetable production,
that is, for just a family type operation. We would
farm about 10 acres for vegetables, much of it hand
labor, which my father and the boys would do early
in the morning a lot of times, daylight before
you'd go to work at 8 o'clock, and we'd go to school.
Of course, we were engaged in that on and I'm sure
that early on I developed a real strong interest in
livestock, not only with our own but with other
livestock producers in Orange County. My uncle,
my mother's brother was there and an employee of
the local meat packing company. So I used to go with
him some out to the little meat packing company. I
think that was contributed to the early interest I
had in the meats business. I was going to ask you
about how you became interested in animal
science. Now as far as your parents are concerned,
it's obvious that you've had a very successful
career. What ways do you think that your parents
are responsible for that? Well, I think they're
very much responsible for it. developing high
standards of performance in school all right from
the start, elementary school to high school, and
then encouraging responsibility and insisting
on responsibility all along related to our
livestock business, our little farming
enterprises. that sort of thing.
Can we shift to your early education? Pardon? Can
we shift now to your early education? Could you
tell me about your early education?
Well the rural schools in Orange County in those
days were not very good so my father paid tuition
for all of his children to attend schools in town.
He would drop the kids off at elementary school or
high school on his way to work. Early on after we
became older we'd ride bicycles along the way. Now
was this to attend private schools or the public
schools in town? Public schools in town as uh
instead of attending
rural school in those days in our district where we
lived.
And all of the children in our family had real fine
records in elementary, high school, in Orange
County. What were your favorite subjects? Well, I
guess math, biology, not history.
It's kind of funny though, isn't it, that you
describe your parents as being patriotic, yet
you're not interested in American history. Well,
I'm interested. I would not say I'm uninterested,
but I guess I was active outside with livestock,
with sports and other things, and
I guess was not inspired with all the time it took to
read and study history. That's really the basic
reason I thought. Never have been uninterested in
it but just haven't been as inspired with that as
some other subjects. Of course we had vocational
agriculture in high school and I took all of that
and was influenced some by the teacher of
vocational agriculture, there's no question
that he's the one that was a former student of Texas
A&M. Oh really, what was his name? His name was
Garden Hart, H-A-R-T.
He actually is the one that inspired me to enroll in
agricultural engineering, that's what his
degree was in, as well as vocational. education or
agricultural education. So oddly enough, I
started out at Texas A&M as an engineer. An
agricultural engineer. That was my initial
major. Oh, we're going to get to A&M in a minute.
Let's stay back here. How about high school? What
high school did you go to? To Orange High School.
There was just one high school in the city. And your
favorite subjects then were still biology and
Mathematics, English, biology and vocational
agriculture. What kind of student were you? Well I
had very acceptable grades. I don't know, over 90
average in high school. But actually I'd have to
say not a whole lot of effort.
I had a very strange kind of an ambition. That is
that I'd get all the way through high school and
never take a book home. So we had study hall
periods. I did all of the work required for
homework and everything in study halls in high
school.
I actually double promoted three times along the
way and the last time didn't work. I don't remember
exactly what grade it was in, maybe about fifth
grade. I remember when I double promoted I got in
that class and it was way over my head and I resisted
that and so I was put back. So actually I skipped one
grade. But at this time, correct me if I'm wrong,
didn't schools, you were promoted half grades at a
time? Half grades, sure. So I actually graduated
from high school at age 16. A year early then? A year
early. Of course there were only 11 grades in the
public schools then. So I got a degree, a high
school diploma at age 16. Oh that's strong. What
activities were you interested in or
participated in in high school? I participated in
the sports activities and then the activities
related to vocational agriculture. The 4-H? Not
4-H, FFA.
So I did in high school during vacation period work
with the county agricultural agent and mapping
farms around county one year. So I did get exposed
to the county extension agent in Orange County
during my career. What sports? Primarily
basketball. I was a little fella. I did later in
football. I was like a hundred and twenty-five,
thirty pound halfback. Not very good, but I did
later in football. Did your head get stepped on
quite a few times?
Yeah. I was associated with the famous Hilliard
family in Arnie County, the youngest one of those
Hilliards. was a teammate on football. He never
made it quite as big in the University of Texas as
his older brothers did, who were very famous
football players for the University of Texas. In
the F and the Future Farmers of America, did you
participate in any leadership positions? Yes. I
was an officer in the FFA chapter. I've forgotten
exactly which one of the officer positions I held.
I did participate in judging activities, made a
team that went to the Houston livestock show.
Really? We didn't. do any good in the state judging
contests,
but through basketball and FFA activities I was, I
did travel around to the other communities in that
district.
So it seems then that you were, that you started a
position of leadership or responsibility fairly
early in life. Do you agree with that or disagree?
Well I'd say that I certainly wasn't a very
dominant leader in high school times. Well can you
explain that? Well I was younger, a year younger
than most of my classmates and while I
participated in things
I wasn't good enough at sports to be dominant at
all. I got academic recognition along in the
classes. I'd say it's kind of an average career in
high school. Would you consider yourself popular
in high school? I guess so.
Okay. You graduated at the age of 16 and this was
right in the middle of the depression, wasn't it?
Yeah, is it over?
How did the Great Depression affect your life and
your family's lives? Well it was very traumatic in
1929 when my father went broke lumber business and
box factory business.
He elected not to take bankruptcy but to pay off his
debts so that was a burden on our family for years
for him to pay off the debts that had been incurred
with his business failure.
I don't think it hurt us at all. We did learn to
sacrifice, never lag for food. We certainly were
not extravagant in clothing at all or in
entertainment, but that's the way all our peers
were too, so we didn't know anybody. And I'm
certain that some sacrifices along there helped
demold character for my brothers and me. We knew
what it was to be denied things. Yeah, yeah. Would
you think that this has an increased possibility
of making you want to save money, or? I'm not sure
what your thoughts, but. There's no question that
that certainly made me conservative about
financial matters. It seemed to have
approximately the same effect on my father.
Were any of your, what was your older brother for
example, did he join the CCC's or any New Deal
programs? Did you benefit in any way from any New
Deal programs? No. My sister was an outstanding
student in high school. My brother had about the
same kind of high school record I had. When he
graduated from high school, he went to work. Both
my sister and my brother worked at a casket factory
in Orange.
So we were making it on our own without any kind of
subsidy program
at all. Was one of the reasons your father went into
politics because of the 1929 crash and the fact
that it had on his job? Well, there's no question
about that, that when his business failed, he
looked for an opportunity to use his accounting
and business skills and his knowledge of real
estate.
And of course the opportunity was there to be Chief
Deputy Tax Assessor Collector. He had of course
established contact with that office and his
lumber dealings around and leasing land for
timber and purchase of land and that sort of thing.
It was a sort of a natural relationship to the job he
had done since timber was so important in Orange
County area at that time. Did the depression have
an effect not only on your father but on your
mother?
Well mother was a homebody. Her social life was
around the church and our relatives, her brother
and his wife that also lived in Orange County.
I would say that she was such a conservative person
along there that for instance she never learned to
drive an automobile in her whole life.
Why was that? Can you explain that? I think she was a
retiring homemaker type. She stayed home, took
care of the kids, did the cooking and chores like
that that homemakers were expected to do. She
never had to learn. She was an intelligent woman,
but my father was a pretty dominant kind of a
fellow. He pretty well made the decisions related
to the family all right.
early on. She
didn't go anywhere much that he didn't go so she
didn't need to be able to drive an automobile.
There weren't any automobiles when she was a young
girl when she would normally would have learned to
drive which she just never did. Learned to drive
and just never to this day. Was your father a
Democrat? Yes, he was. And was he a Roosevelt man?
Well, I would say that he was not a blind supporter
of the Democratic Party. I think he liked certain
aspects of the Roosevelt regime, but was not
fascinated with other aspects. welfare part of
it, the socialistic part of it, he was not
fascinated with at all. He couldn't stomach Al
Smith, so I'm sure when Al Smith ran for
presidency, he didn't vote for Al Smith or support
him, so I would say that In certain ways, he was an
independent, but he always ran on the Democratic
ticket, because everybody else did in Texas
during that period. Absolutely, absolutely. Did
his politics and his being a member of the
Democratic Party have an influence on your future
politics?
No, I don't think so. He's good. help us to analyze
issues and support people rather than parties. So
he did not try to influence us, any of the children,
to be party members, but to be rather independent
thinkers. And I suspect that's what our people,
all of our family members are without being
committed to one political party or another. But
he talked issues with his sons? Oh no question,
sure. I bet you that was stimulating. He was a fine
companion to his sons. He was an ardent hunter and
fisherman, so he took us hunting and fishing very
often. Spent a lot of time with his sons.
and of course a lot of time working too, that is
outside of his office hours and with our livestock
and with our truck farming operations. But all the
colleges in Texas and in the nation, why'd you come
to A&M? Was it because of your high school teacher
primarily? Or were there other reasons? Well, we
were
inclined some toward agriculture.
A big thing in our county during those days was for
people to come to the Farm at Home Week at Texas A&M.
So many of my friends and their families would come
here. We had a lot of activities related to home
demonstration agents and county agents, food
preservation, canning, things like that. So
Texas A&M was just an extremely dominant type
association in the county. And certainly we
didn't have any wide acquaintanceship with other
universities. I suppose we never even seriously
considered any other institution. You never
considered an alternative like LSU or? Oh no,
think about a state. Tuition probably. That's
right, of course Lamar State University, Lamar,
we were just getting started in Beaumont,
Jefferson County.
a reputation that was anywhere comparable to
Texas A&M. Of course, the two universities in our
county that were real dominant were Texas A&M and
the University of Texas. The dominant wealthy
people in the county were supporters of the
University of Texas. Orange had a real strong
orientation toward the University of Texas. H.J.
Ledger Stark was one of the major supporters of the
University of Texas financially. We had a number
of varsity football players.
But I'm sure that the primary influence I had were
from the county extension agent and the
vocational teacher, the teacher of vocational
agriculture. Both good Texas Aggies. plus the
fact that you enjoyed working with the animals on
your small spread. Yes, that's right. Did your
father boost education? He had a high school
degree.